Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricard Lops, and
today I'm joined by our return guest, Doctor Rivke
Weinberg. She's a professor of philosophy at Scripps College
in Claremont, California, and today we're going To talk
about her latest book, The Meaning of It All
Ultimate Meaning, Everyday Meaning, Cosmic Meaning, Death, and time.
So Dr. Weinberg, welcome back to the show. It's
always a pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much. Thanks for having me back.
OK, so, um, first of all, I, I would
like to start by asking you this. So what
is the premise of your book, and I would
also be interested, uh, be interested to know whether,
uh, you wrote the book. I, I mean, just
because it's a topic that you're interested in or
that. Or because you have a particular timing in
mind that you thought that uh such a topic
in this particular time period in the particular context
we're living in would be relevant. I, I mean,
what motivated you to write it?
So I. I'll answer your second question first. I
think that the topic of the meaning of life
is always relevant at all times, in all places,
and so there's nothing particularly topical about it. And
I wrote it while thinking about, I mean, I've
thought about these questions my whole life, and I
wrote about it when I thought I had something
I could say, could make a contribution to say
something new and illuminating. Uh, WHICH certainly took a
long time, but I've been thinking about these things
always. Uh, WHAT would, what could be a more
common question about the human condition than to ask
about its point, its value, its significance, its effects,
uh, you know, all of the things that are
included when we think about meaning. So it's not
particularly timed. This is time, I think. I think
these questions are always relevant. About the premise of
the book. So in a certain way, a premise
is an assumption, and I try not to make
assumptions in my work. I try to build the
arguments as much as possible without assumptions, but the
approach, uh, which is a kind of premise when
I started thinking about meaning was to be very
expansive and inclusive, to think, what do we mean
when we talk about meaning, so that we could
get all the kinds of meaning and all the
characteristics of meaning and sort of sort it all
out and think about. The broad question, meaning. That's
why the book is called The Meaning of it
all, uh, because it includes ultimate meaning, cosmic meaning,
everyday meaning death and meaning, time and meaning. And
so that was sort of the approach to the
book was to be, uh, comprehensive.
Mhm. Right. Uh, BUT I mean, why do you
think that we as humans, or, I mean, at
least I imagine that most people out there, I
mean, I'm not sure if there would be, for
example, any culture where people for some reason just
do not care much about asking. These types of
questions, but why do you think that people in
general seem to be interested in asking a question
such as what's the point? I mean, what's the
point of living? What's the point of life, whether
life has any meaning or not? I mean, why
do you think that people are interested in that?
I think people ask what's the point because a
point is a valued end and that we work
toward within, you know, in some of our efforts
or our projects or enterprises and so of course
because you're putting forth the effort, you want to
know why you're doing it. And so it's just
a natural question to ask and to worry about,
especially because a lot of times our efforts don't
succeed or we have a lot of suffering or
a lot of loss, and then it's like why
am I still working. And so I think it's
the effort and the investment we make in our
projects, uh, in the things that can be meaningful
in our lives, in the values we have, uh,
that, uh, that cause us to ask what is
the valued end. If you are working towards something
and putting forth effort, uh, uh, aiming at a
value, you're going to ask. Why is this a
worthy value that I'm aiming at? Am I gonna
get there? And those are all kinds of what's
the point questions that we ask because we put
forth effort and investment in our lives and in
the things that are important to us in our
life.
But do you think that this is a question
that everyone should consider? I mean, I'm asking you
this not to diminish, not to try to diminish
its importance, of course. I mean, I personally am
also very interested in this kind of question, but
I mean sometimes maybe people just go through life
and they, for example, got from their A cultural
context, a particular kind of, uh, answer that they
accept. I mean, it might be from religion, it
might be from some other source, and they just
run with it and don't think much about or
don't question much of what they've learned from the
society they live in or the particular socio-cultural context
they live in. Uh, uh, SO, uh, I mean,
do you, do you think that people, um, should
ask themselves that question?
Yes, because you want to make sure that you're
living a life that actually has meaning. And so,
otherwise you're working for nothing. So if you're working
for something pointless and or for some negative value,
let's say, in a, in a Nazi culture, you
can just accept it, but then what you're doing
is contrary to value and we'll have what I
call negative meaning. And so, and each person, you
have this one life to live, you're responsible for
yourself, uh, and so I think it is, yeah,
incumbent upon everybody who acts as an agent. To
reflect on what they are aiming at, what values
ground what they do, uh, what's the purpose of
their efforts? Are they doing something significant and valuable?
I think that's part of the responsibility of agency,
and I think it's also good for the person.
Because you want to make sure that your actions
are actually or that your investments and your efforts
are actually meaningful and that, you know, so if
you're sitting, if you're doing something contrary to meaning
or not meaningful, you are wasting your opportunity for
meaning and that is, I think, bad for you.
OK, so we'll come back to that question later,
but in the book you explore three different kinds
of meaning, or at least what you label as
three different kinds of meaning everyday meaning, cosmic meaning,
and ultimate meaning. Could you explain the distinction and
why you think the distinction between these three different
kinds of meaning matters?
Yeah, so I think that everyday meaning is the
meaning in our everyday lives. It includes all of
what I call the characteristics of meaning. It includes
the point, which is the valued end at which
that grounds our efforts or that our efforts are
aimed at. It includes the purpose, which is the
reason something is done. Significance, why something matters, um,
impact, the effects, uh, um, explanation, sort of coherence
and sense. Did I get them all? Value, let's
see, point, purpose, value, impact, significant, and explanation. Yeah,
those are the things. So that's uh everyday meaning
and an example would be, let's say you are
uh. Growing plants or taking care of a child,
or I don't know, washing, you know, doing your
job, which is probably valuable. Let's say you, uh,
you're a dishwasher or a teacher or whatever you
are, you can think about, well, what is the
reason for what I'm, for what I'm doing. That's
part of the meaning. What is the point, the
value end that I'm aiming at? Well, like here,
I'm, I'm doing this to benefit. THE people in
my life or to help the environment. Those are
values. Love is a value. Kindness, I mean, the
knowledge, uh, beauty, those are all values that our
actions can aim at. How much do they matter?
Uh, WHAT kind of effects do they have? Do
they make sense? Do they cohere with, you know,
with my life? Am I doing something that, that
fits together? So those are, that's everyday meaning. Uh,
COSMIC meaning is based, is meaning based on our
cosmic niche or our cosmic role, and a lot
of theological accounts, uh, fall into this category of
cosmic meaning. This is your place in the universe
to, I don't know, unite with God or to
do God's will or whatever. It could also be,
uh, secular. There are secular accounts as well of
cosmic meaning, meaning based on our role in the
cosmos and our shape and, and. Cosmic niche. So
what is the purpose of our, of our role?
What is the reason for our activity or whatever
we're doing, our efforts within the cosmos, how much
it matters? What's the value of it? Uh, DOES
it make sense? What's the impact? Those are all
questions of cosmic meaning. Ultimate meaning is a different
kind of question. It's kind of a meta question.
It's a question that that someone, an agent who's
living a life and running your life, as I
think we all do. IS asking, well, what is
the point of this project I'm doing? I get
why I'm doing the other things, why I'm raising
my kids and washing the dishes and, you know,
Uh, listening to beautiful music or composing or whatever
I'm doing, uh, but why am I doing this
other thing? Running my actual life, running my leading
a life? Why am I doing that? That's sort
of ultimate meaning, and I think that sort of,
uh, just the only characteristic it has is point.
Why am I doing this whole thing? And I
think that we don't, we, that, that is metaphysically
impossible, which we can talk about. And that is
why I separate it out because it also makes
sense of some common experiences. Like you can say,
you know, I'm living a life that's meaningful. I
have meaningful relationships. I have meaningful work. But why
do I have this separate question still going on
in the back of my mind? Uh, WHAT'S the
point of the whole thing? That's because that is
your ultimate meaning question. And so even if you
have everyday meaning, because you cannot have ultimate meaning,
you might still have these doubts that persist while
you know that you are doing and having everyday
meaning.
Do you think that most people, if they're or
if they think or are asked the question of
whether their life is meaningful, that maybe they tend
to conflate the Three different kinds of meaning and
then that could have negative consequences for them, I
mean for how they live their lives or even
their mental health or something like that.
Yeah, I I think it can be. Um, VERY
clarifying to understand like where that buzz is coming
from, that it's not that your life actually doesn't
have everyday meaning, that you should, you know, abandon
your projects or, or give up, uh, but that
you just have this sadness and feeling of, oh,
but There's this other meaning that I want, ultimate
meaning. It makes sense to want it because you
run your life and that is also work. That's
effort you're putting forth, kind of doing it for
nothing. That's kind of sad. And it's good to
separate that out so you can see the meaning
that you still have and understand the feelings of
meaninglessness that can come from a meaning that you
cannot have. As for cosmic meaning, I think that
cosmic meaning when we really try to think about
how it works, even assuming all theological assumptions or
any natural or supernatural assumptions, it's really hard to
see how it is, uh. Makes much of a
difference either way. And so if you're putting your
whole sort of life efforts toward cosmic meaning or
a cosmic promise in the afterlife or something like
that, that could be a waste of your everyday
meaning opportunities if people are doing that. That is
not a common thing, I think, because most religions
also advocate for meaning for everyday meaning when they
tell people to be kind. To others or to,
you know, study and things like that, that is
also everyday meaning. An exception would be, uh, for
example, um, some Buddhist recommendations to live only in
the moment, which is because of, uh, and I
think those work to reduce suffering, but as maybe
we could talk about later, I think that those,
that approach, uh, reduces meaning.
OK, so, uh, let me ask you more about
each of these types of meaning and starting with
ultimate meaning. I mean, is there such a thing?
I mean, is there a point or valid end
to living life? Is it possible at all to
find that kind of meaning?
So the reason that you cannot have ultimate meaning
is because the reason I argue that it's metaphysically
impossible is because a point is a valued end
and ends always lie outside of the projects or
efforts that aim at them or that ground them.
And so it's this metaphysical fact, the nature of
values and the nature of efforts that make ultimate
meaning impossible because let's say when I play with
my children, uh, the, the value, the everyday meaning
of the act is the stacking blocks, let's say.
That's not very meaningful. Pretty boring. Uh, THE, the
meaning lies outside of the act in the love,
in the intimacy, in the people, in the children.
If I, if I'm building a house, that's a
lot of effort. The value of that, the point
of that lies, it's not the house itself. Why
are you building the house? It's not the value
is not the meaning is not in the house.
It lies in the valued end. The point is
to provide shelter for people. That's a valued end.
And so that uh if we think about what
So that's the first step. Value always lies outside
of the effort that it is aimed at or
that grounds it. When you think about the project
of running your life, all your values are in
that project. That's why you're doing them. That's what,
so if you care about justice, let's say you
give it a place in the project, the meta-project
of running your life, and that, because it's in
that project. The project of running your life has
nowhere outside of it to reach for meaning, and
you can't say that justice, you, you can see
that justice itself is not going to be the
meaning because what happens when things are just already.
Things are just enough, right? At some point you
have to stop, otherwise you're being nitpicky and annoying
and making sure everybody has exactly the same amount
or whatever, you're becoming obsessive, it's counterproductive. You can
go too far. So let's say things are just
enough. You hit, you've hit that goal, but what's
the point of the rest of your life? And
you can see that, uh, your life contains that,
that is the, the justice value is in the
project of running your life and so it cannot
serve as the Point of running it. So it's
this meta effort and meta project of the running
of your life that cannot have a point because
it has nowhere to reach outside of it for
a point because all the values and the things
that you're aiming at are in the project. That's
how you make them part of your life project.
You care about justice. You include it in the
project of running your life. So now that project
of running your life, it's got nothing to reach
for for a point and remains pointless.
Do you think that people tend to care about
this type of meaning?
I think that uh not everyone thinks about it,
um, but I think that it is only natural
to care about it and it makes sense to
care about it because the same way that when
you're working toward, uh, your college education, and if
you found out that that was for nothing, you're
not gonna learn anything, you're not gonna get a
better job, you're not going to help support your
family, all the reasons you're doing it, well, that,
that's not gonna happen. It has no point. Well,
you want to know about that, right? You care
about that. And the same way you run your
life. You don't you care to know whether this
is a pointless effort or not a pointless effort?
I think it makes sense to care about it.
Because you're putting forth the effort.
Uh, BUT I, I mean, but ultimately, does it
matter if life is pointless?
I think it does because I think it is
really sad to recognize. It doesn't mean that your
life is worthless because you have these other kinds
of meaning. You have everyday meaning, maybe you have
a little cosmic meaning. Uh, BUT you're, but so,
but you, but it does make sense to care
about it because it makes sense to want it,
because you're working for every effort or project or
enterprise that you're working for, you want there to
be a point. So it doesn't make sense to
say, well, I don't care that it's pointless. What,
what, you know, because you're doing it for the
effort, because you're putting forth work into it. Now,
I can see one of my, I was talking
to a friend of mine about this some years
ago, and she was like, well, I don't care
if it's pointless, it's fun. I could see that
saying, well, it doesn't have to have a point,
because it's so much fun. But it is, it
is not. It is not so much fun. Life
is difficult, right? It is very, uh, I don't
think it is, you can, it, it is not
the case that life is always fun for everyone
who lives it. It is sometimes fun for some
people who are running their life project, and so
I don't think that is uh enough to say.
I don't think that's a satisfactory answer. I think
we put it is, we, we put forth effort,
we suffer, and to have that for nothing. I
think it makes sense to care about it. Now,
how much are you going to care about it?
That goes in proportion. Some people are more goal-oriented
and it bothers them more. Some people are less
and it bothers them less. But if you don't
care about it at all, that means you're giving
up your humanity and your agency because you're not
running that means, you know, because anyone who makes
plans for the future, who thinks about, should I
raise, you know, children or chickens, should I build
a house? Should I take a job? Should I
take, you know, and, you're, you're running your life
and And you're doing that for nothing, and that,
that should, that's a sad thing. It's like I
said, it doesn't mean that you should spend the
rest of your life crying about it. Uh, THAT
would be, uh, silly. There's nothing you can do
about it, and you should, so, but it makes
sense to be sad because that's the appropriate reaction
to a sad fact, and then you carry on
with the rest of your life where you can
have a lot of everyday meaning.
Mm, uh, but I mean, picking on the example
you gave from your friend who said something along
the lines, oh yeah, life is pointless, but it's
fun, so it doesn't really matter if it's pointless.
Uh, AND this I guess is a question that
we'll return to over the course of our conversation,
but, uh, what if there are people out there
with particular kinds of, uh, psychological personality traits, or
I, I mean, whatever kinds of psychological. TRAITS that
make them look at life in that particular way
and for them that is just good enough. I
mean, OK, so for me life is pointless, but
it doesn't really matter because I'm having fun and
they have enough fun for for it to, I
mean for it to be worth living or worth
continuing life. I mean, do you think that That,
that is a plausible position to have and to
what extent do you think that we should consider
subjectivity when dealing with these kinds of questions?
So I think there's 3 different things. One is
everyone has a reason to keep living. Just because
you don't have ultimate meaning, you have everyday meaning.
So not having ultimate meaning is not a reason
to kill yourself. Or to stop trying to run
your life. Uh, NOW, but even the people who
are enjoying life are still working for it. When
you put forth effort towards something, when you're running
a project or make or or an enterprise, it,
it is kind of, it just doesn't make sense
not to be sad if that work is for
nothing, that work if you're, it's so that I
just don't think that that is a reasonable response.
Uh, YOU can say it doesn't bother me that
much because even though I'm working for nothing, I'm
also enjoying it. So it can bother you a
little less, but I think it should, it should
bother you because the same way you want all
of your projects to, to have a point, all
of your efforts to be going somewhere, you should
want this other effort, the meta effort to also
be going somewhere. So, that's why I think that
that response is not sufficient, uh, even if you
have a cheery temperament. The next question is, is
meaning subjective? I do not think so. And the
reason I don't think so is because I don't
think that value is subjective. Uh, AND so, um,
I think that things like beauty and knowledge and
freedom and truth are objectively valuable or, or at
least, and let's say, and, and I don't give
independent arguments for that. I accept the arguments of
the classic ethical theories that argue this like Kantian
ethics, utilitarian ethics, consequentialist ethics, Aristotelian ethics. I accept
those. I think they make good arguments and a
good case for objective value, but even If I
didn't think value was completely objective in that sense,
I would still think that it is, uh, that
value is objective because there's a concept of good
for, for any functional system we can ask what
is good for it. Is sunlight good for a
vampire? No. Is sunlight good for a plant? Usually
yes, right? And so the concept of good for
can ground certain values. What is good for a
person? It's a It's an Aristotelian concept. What is
conducive to human flourishing, and that can grant that
can sort of show you what is valuable for
a person. Things like creativity, knowledge, beauty, health. These
are all things that are good for a person.
Amar Jaen and Martha Nussbaum have developed this theory
more based on Aristotle, it's sort of an objectiveist
conception of what is good for a person. And
so because those are objective. VALUABLE, uh, and value
is very in a very important aspect of meaning.
I don't think meaning is subjective. For example, uh,
if you're gonna count, and this is an example
in the literature, if you say, well, what I'm
going to do with my life is count the
blades on my front lawn every morning, unless it's
like performance art or some other kind of way
that you can find this meaningful, you are making,
if that's what you do with your life, you
are wasting your opportunities for meaning. It is not
meaningful. In addition, and this is, and, and some
people, some philosophers do take this up and reject
subjective meaning for this reason. Susan Wolffe is one
person who does that, but they don't, uh, but
they still think, some of them, that you still
need the subjectivity part, and I don't think so.
I think it's purely objective for because here's the
other example, the flip side of that. Uh, LET'S
say somebody does something very meaningful, like creates a
vaccine like Jonas Salk that cures that prevents polio,
uh, or does something like, um, Gandhi, who was
a freedom fighter and had a lot of success
in liberating India from colonial rule. What if these
people who have done clearly meaningful things, meaning they're
valuable, they're significant, they're impactful, they have a purpose,
they have a point, they make sense. And what
if these people later in their lives say, my
life was meaningless? What I did didn't matter. They're
making a mistake. And so, uh, that is why
I think that, um, meaning is not subjective. Your
subjective experience has objective value and in that sense
is included in objective meaning, but I don't think
that meaning is subjective.
OK, so I mean, I, I don't want to
go off on a big, on a lengthy tangent
here because I mean those are, that is a
particular question that I've already explored on the show
with other philosophers and It's, it doesn't really, I,
I, I, I, I mean, it, it would lead
us astray, I guess, when it comes to exploring
the topics of your book, but, uh, I've had
people with different kinds of views on this topic,
but do you consider, um, I mean, for example,
and I've had this conversation with Doctor Owen Flanagan
on the show, uh. Uh, WHEN it comes to,
uh, for example, uh, anti-moral realism and looking at,
uh, uh, um, anthropological science and, uh, psychological science
and so on, basically about how people vary in
terms of their values cross culturally and Inter interindividually
and so on, uh, are, do you consider that
those kinds of explorations have any bearing on whether
value or meaning is at least to some extent
subjective or not.
So this. The fact that there's disagreement doesn't mean
there's no fact of the matter. There are plenty
of scientific disagreements and we don't decide that therefore,
there's no answer or the answer is subjective. So
mere disagreement does not prove subjectivity. That's the first
point. The second point is, even though there are
cultural differences and variation in value, there are still
extreme commonalities. Every culture values life. If they didn't,
they would cease to exist. Every culture values relationships.
Every culture values. Every culture values justice and fairness.
Every culture values knowledge and truth. And so, uh,
I actually find that if you're thinking about the,
you know, agreement as a criteria, you will have
widespread agreement on basic intrinsic moral values, the kinds
that I'm talking about. So I actually don't, I
think first of all, that is not a way
to decide whether that's something is subjective. And I
think that the, uh, that if it is a
way to decide, you will see that if you're
thinking about root values, intrinsic values, That I think
that they are very widely shared.
So, uh, moving on to everyday meaning then, I
mean, how does it manifest in people's lives?
Luckily, it manifests everywhere, not everywhere, but it is
there are many opportunities. Not everyone, some people can
have it, you know, terrible life circumstances, but most
lives have opportunities for meaning because, uh, if you
are engaging with objective value, which includes, like I
said, love, knowledge, creativity. Uh, uh, BEAUTY, freedom, all
of these values are things that many people, most
people have an opportunity to engage with in their
life. Not everybody's going to be equally significant and
do, you know, have the same sort of intensity
of meaning or opportunities for meaning, but I think
most lives, uh, can have many opportunities for meaning.
Most people can have an opportunity to have personal
relationships which can be made very meaningful based on
their values of intimacy and love and faithfulness and
all the. Other ways in which we can have
meaning between in relationships. Most people do some kind
of work. The world needs all the jobs unless
with the exception of things that have negative value.
So you are contributing, you are being significant. You're
making it, you know, uh, you matter in that
way, um, and, and you can be a moral
person which also has great value. Uh, YOU can
be a curious person, try to learn things. You
can learn all kinds of things. You can learn
about the plants in your garden. You can learn
about your environment. You can learn about book, you
know, you can do book learning, that experiential learning.
All of these things have value and so and
have meaning and significance and make sense and so
I think opportunities for everyday meaning are abundant.
Oh, OK, so, uh, I mean, about, uh, uh,
let me just pick on one of the examples
you gave there, the example of knowledge, just because
I mean, with the kind of work that I
have and talking very regularly with academics and intellectuals,
it's, and because I myself, uh, like to learn
a lot. So, uh, I would like to ask
you, because nowadays, um, in, in an academic context
and also even outside of academia. Because of the
economic system we live in, people tend to tend
to try to reduce the value of knowledge to
the economic value it can produce. So if a
particular kind of knowledge directly or directly correlates in
some way with Economic value than for people that
is valuable, but if it doesn't, then it is
less valuable or not valuable at all. I mean,
do you think that knowledge in and of itself
is valuable independently of it generating some kind of
economic value or not?
Of course, I, I think that's a very peculiarly
narrow view to take of knowledge. That is one
value of knowledge can be the impact it has
economically, but it can also have the other impacts
of enriching your life and enabling you to appreciate
value which is meaningful. For example, uh, I went
to Brooklyn College, it's a City College, and then
when I went there, the city of New York,
they had a very extensive uh uh core program
of requirements. They made everybody take everything. You have
to take art and music and And so, not
appreciating art very much, I had to take it,
so I took it. And now I appreciate art.
And it wasn't because it was the most mind-blowing
class. It was a regular art appreciation class. It
was fine. I learned about art. I appreciate art.
I love art. I do art. I take my
children to museums. I go to museums. I, I,
I actually do some art myself, and that has
been very meaningful in my life. I have made
$0. It has nothing to do with economics, and
that can apply in many areas of knowledge. It
doesn't just have to be art. Uh, BUT the
point of, you know, knowledge is valuable for its
own sake. It's, uh, it enriches a person. It
expands a person's mind, and it is meaningful. Of
course, it's, it is, it can be meaningful economically,
but that is only, that's sort of a derivative
way. But I think it is valuable for its
own sake, and you can see that by the
way that people pursue knowledge and enjoy learning when
it is not sort of pressured or too expensive.
People, you know, it's, uh, it's appreciated.
Uh, WHAT does it mean to fulfill our human
potential? I mean, what, what does that mean from
a philosophical perspective?
Yes, so the reason I discussed this in my
book is because I'm talking about, uh, everyday meaning,
and I'm thinking about what is good for us,
uh, because those are the values that we should
aim at in our everyday meaningful efforts and, um,
some of the things that, that are good for
a person are to, uh, do, do the sort
of person type things that we can do, which
is an Aristotelian way of looking at it. So
we have these amazing abilities for creativity and emotionality
and. INTELLECTUAL development and all of moral development, all
of those uniquely, uh, it doesn't just, you know,
it doesn't have to be unique to people, but
this is something, these are our sort of higher
human functionings, and it is good for us to
exercise them. It will be more meaningful. Your life
will be more meaningful if you exercise your human
potential. So if you could, let's say, let's say,
let's, I give this example in the book, let's
say with Martin Luther King. Who was a civil
rights leader and had tremendous impact. His life was
very significant. He, he did things for very deep
and important reasons. He, he aimed at valued ends,
made a lot of sense, all of the, you
know, so he had a very meaningful life in
that context, in that sense, in the everyday sense.
He could have, let's say he decided instead to
be a small town preacher like his father was.
His life would still be meaningful, but it wouldn't.
BE as meaningful. And if he decided instead of
that, that he was going to be groceries, which
again is a meaningful job, but if he could
have done something much, you know, sort of exercised
his higher human capacities and done something even more
meaningful that had a bigger impact and that was
more significant, then he would be failing to use
his potential, and that would be an example of
waste. Waste is a failure to appreciate value. And
when you don't exercise. And try to fulfill your
human potential, you are making the value mistake of
waste for you on yourself. You are wasting yourself,
and that is a value error, and a value
error is a meaning error because value is in
a very crucial aspect of meaning.
And what if we fail to fulfill our human
potential? I mean, does that necessarily mean that our
lives are less valuable or less meaningful?
So when we think about failure, uh, sometimes there
can be meaning in failure if you learn a
lot from it, but generally speaking, we aim at
success because success is more meaningful. So if I
am engaged in a project and that project fails,
I will fail to reach the point of it.
Let's say Martin Luther King completely failed as a
civil rights leader. It's not that his efforts would
be meaningless because they would still be valuable. They
were aimed at, it was, it was a good
try. But they are more meaningful if they succeed.
They're more meaningful in terms of their impact, their
significance, their, their purpose, their point, and the sense
that they make. And so to the extent that
we fail, it generally undercuts meaning. But if you
never fail, you didn't aim high enough. And so
you have also sort of failed to, to, to
fulfill your human potential, and that's kind of the,
the double-edged sword of failure like. Failure undercuts meaning.
It's and, and it feels terrible and it's not
meaningful usually. You can learn certain lessons from it,
but as a whole, as in general, it is
not sort of good for meaning to fail. But
if you never fail, it means that your life
is not as meaningful as it should have been
or could have been because you did not aim
high enough. To reach your potential.
Yeah, but I, I mean, let's say that someone
has a particular kind of goal in mind or
they want to do a particular thing or achieve
a particular thing with their lives, and I mean
they have that sort of do or die kind
of attitude, and I mean they try as best
they can, but I mean, it might not even
be their own fault. It might just be the
circumstances that are not good enough, or, I mean,
it's just that the person cannot reach their goal
or cannot achieve whatever they have in mind, and
I mean, taking, taking. Into account a do or
die kind of attitude. They, they just die. They
never reach what they wanted. I mean, can that
still, can that process itself of trying to reach
that end goal be meaningful in and of itself?
Yes, I think the effort is meaningful, but it
is more meaningful if it succeeds. And so if
you are trying to Come up with a vaccine
for a certain kind for a disease and you
fail, it is not as meaningful as if you
would have succeeded, but it is not meaningless because
there's meaning in the effort, there's meaning in your
good intention, there's meaning in whatever you else you
managed to do along the way, and your life,
if you, if you reduce your life to only
one goal, you do risk. You put all your
eggs in one basket, and if that basket, and
so if you don't succeed, it's sort of, you
don't have these other things to say, well, I
had these relationships, I appreciated art, I enjoyed nature,
I, you know, all the other ways in which
you, a life can have meaning. If you have
this sort of project life and you're just aiming
at one thing, then you have narrowed your Your
meaning to one area. Sometimes that can make for
great success and incredible achievement and so you can't
always say don't do that. Uh, THERE can be
times and people for which it makes sense to
do that, and then if they succeed, yes, their
life would be more meaningful than if they fail,
but if they don't succeed, it doesn't mean that
there was no meaning in the effort, but there's
more meaning in an effort that does succeed. That's
where we aim at success. I mean, even objectively
on objective measures, of course, there's more meaning. It
has more impact, it has more significant, it has
more purpose, it has more point. It, it makes
more sense. So success is more meaningful than failure,
but it doesn't mean that failure. Just wipes out
all the meaning.
Right, I, I mean, uh, but, but, uh, do
you think that, uh, people then should perhaps be,
uh, flexible or adaptable in terms of how they
deal with failure, because I, I mean, just to
give an example, it's a sort of a banal
example, but, uh, I'm, I like some sports like
soccer and wrestling, so let's say that someone decides
that they want to be a, WWE wrestler and
for some reason they just never achieved that. I,
I mean, do you think that if they become
completely miserable and depressed because they never achieved that
goal and they have that, as I mentioned, that
sort of do or die kind of attitude, uh,
that, uh, I mean if they just. Try to
be a little bit more flexible and adjust their
lives according to the fact that they failed at
that and try some other thing that is a
better attitude to have than just simply thinking that
their life is completely meaningless because they haven't achieved
that goal.
So because there are many opportunities for meaning and
the different ways to to have a meaningful life,
of course it's a mistake to think that there's
only one way, because there isn't only one way.
Um, AND, uh, especially the goal you mentioned, which
is not especially meaningful. I mean, there's creativity in
sports and it expresses things about, you know, there's
an art to it, but it's not, uh, the
most meaningful thing. It's fake. It's a game. Uh,
I mean, I shouldn't say it's fake because, but
it's, it, there's an artifice to it, and of
course there's many ways, other things that you can
do in your life that will have, uh, a
deep impact and, uh, be very engaged with. Values
in a, in a very sort of uh human
uh aspirational way, uh, but generally to speak to
your answer to be very narrow is probably generally
a mistake. I don't want to say always because
there's different ways uh to have meaning and also
meet uh a value, um, freedom is a value.
People should do what they, what, what resonates with
them and, and go after the values in a
way and meaning in a way that uh. Fits
with their personality and their personal proclivities and all
of that and sometimes uh some people who are
extremely successful in one area and have and achieve
a lot of meaning that way, let's say uh
a profound a concert pianist that maybe their life
is narrower, they can't do other things because they
got to practice all the time and everything like
that, and that can still be valuable and meaningful,
uh, because of the exceptional achievement and because that's
part of the, you know, some the way and
um. They can still have other meaning in their
life. They can have relationships or whatever. So I'm
not gonna just say never be obsessive. I think
that's too extreme to say, but I also think,
of course, if you aim at something and you
are not successful, well then aim at something else.
Right, or go to the next thing. That's a
little too easy to say because sometimes you've expended
a lot of effort and then you fail. There's
nothing to be done about that. That is a
failure. That's terrible, that it would be more meaningful
if you succeeded, and you, you, you're right, you
know, it makes sense to be very sad about
it, about an effort that has not succeeded, um,
but. Uh, THEN there are also, um, other ways
to have meaning in your life other than a
professional success or any particular kind of success. Let's
say somebody doesn't have success in personal relationships, uh,
uh, that does not mean that their life is
going to be meaningless because there are other ways
to pursue meaning in your life.
Yeah, but, but for example, do you think that
it can be, I mean, do you think that
philosophically speaking, it can be plausible for people to,
OK, so let's say for example, that someone is
very obsessive about Or they are aiming a lot
at becoming a great philosopher or they want to
develop, for example, and or they have the ambition
of developing a new philosophical system in whatever area
if with that goal in mind they decide to
Sacrifice other domains of their lives like the social
domain, uh, relationships, I mean romantic relationships, even perhaps
sometimes friendships and so on, uh, that they, if
they, if they have that goal in mind, they
should go ahead with it, that it's worthwhile.
It can be. I'm not gonna say never do
that. It is a, it is a high-risk kind
of a life because you're putting all your eggs
in one basket. I don't think that usually works.
I think that, uh, you can be a genius
and have relationships. You can focus in one area
and still have other areas. I think if all
you do all day is try to do one
thing. Probably, and, and that's all you do with
all your hours of the day. I don't know,
it's not usually a recipe for success anyway at
that one thing. So it's probably not a very
pragmatic way to live your life, uh, uh, but
it's not a meaningless way. It's a meaning risk
because you're putting all your eggs in this narrow
basket, and it's probably not the best, you know,
not the most prudent thing to do, uh, um.
I, I would say, yeah, that I think that's
my answer.
Right. So how about cosmic meaning? I mean, is
it important and if it's important, in what ways
is it
important? So when I think about cosmic meaning, that
would be meaning based on our cosmic role or
our cosmic niche, uh, and um You can have
secular accounts, but most of the accounts are more
theological and thinking about, well, what is our purpose,
God's purpose. You, you think it's thinking about cosmic
meaning in terms of, again, purpose and nothing can
give you ultimate meaning, so that, that's not even
God doesn't help. Uh, SO we would still going
to think about. Cosmic purpose, cosmic value, cosmic explanation,
and those are things that I explore to think
about, well, taking all these accounts at face value,
granting all the miracles or whatever else you want,
taking all the premises as is, just taking heaven
as described, um, how meaningful can it be? And
I find that, uh, it turns out. Not very
meaningful, uh, and so because of that, because of
that exploration, it turns out like, well, I guess
it just doesn't make that much, it's not this
like big game changer, uh, either way in terms
of meaning, and I'll give you one example which
is cosmic purpose. I mean, wouldn't it be great
if We had this cosmic purpose, this reason for
our being here, that would be fantastic. Well, what
could that reason be? And so if we look
to theological accounts, a lot, uh, some people talk,
some Christian accounts talk about heavenly bliss, uh, but
bliss sounds blissful, but it doesn't sound meaningful. It's
like a, a drug trip maybe just a state,
an emotional state. OK, but that's, so let's, uh,
but, but most of these accounts, um, many accounts
realize this, and they're not, they say, well, we're
not talking about bliss. We're talking about communion. When
you commune with God and you can imagine this
sort of sublime, intimate, transcendent relationship with a perfect
being, uh, and wouldn't that be fantastic. All right,
well, let's think about how that would work. First
of all, it, in some ways, it is fantastic.
You're gonna appreciate greatness like appreciating nature, appreciating nature
or something like that. Uh, AND these accounts also
talk about partaking of the divine nature that, you
know, sounds, sounds great. Certainly more meaningful than bliss.
However, there's some problems. Uh, FIRST of all, the
relationship is profoundly unequal, right? Uh, AND so it
sort of works against, uh, the value of equality
in our relationships. It's not the be all and
end all. Not everybody cares about that, but it's
sort of like negative factor, at least, uh, it
can't, you know, because it doesn't have that value.
But even worse, in terms of a purpose, it's
a pathetic purpose because it's derivative. Your, your whole
reason for being here is just to appreciate something
else. It's like you're being cast as audience in
your theater group's play. You're a partaker of the
divine nature. You're like sucking on God's infinite teeth.
There's something that it does not. Uh, LIVE up
to human potential about that as our purpose. Another
cosmic purpose, and you some, there are some Buddhist
accounts of this, some kabbalistic accounts of this as
a cosmic purpose is to return to the mind
of God or become one with the universe and,
uh, your ego, you, you shed your ego, you
cease to exist as an individual and you go
back from whence you came, uh, you know, like
a wave returns to the ocean. Um, AND your
suffering is over, you're over, but what kind of
a purpose is that? What was the point of
the whole journey? That seems especially pointless to me.
And so, and that's just an example of cosmic
purpose, but similarly for all other kinds of things
that we think about in terms of cosmic meaning,
they just don't turn out to, to seem so
great. It's not like it's nothing or pointless or
like. Bad, but in terms of meaning, it just
doesn't seem like very like a like a great
source of meaning.
Oh, OK, so, um, I mean, do you think
then that, er, the kinds of experiences that religious
people report and their belief that they, for example,
will be in commune with God in the end.
Afterlife or even as in this life as they
understand it, they're trying to do their best to
fulfill God's mission or the mission that God supposedly
gave them. Do you think that that can be
meaningful at all, that can give them some sort
of cosmic meaning or not at all?
It depends what the mission is. So usually the
mission is some kind of goodness. To be kind
to others, which has its own value, cosmic or
not, because it's valuable. I don't think the cosmic
aspect adds very, the fact that let's say it's
God's purpose. Well, what is the the meaning of
doing someone else's purpose? If it is consistent with
your purpose, uh, then great. If it's not consistent
with your purpose, that's actually bad. You're doing something
contrary to your own purposes, uh, but if it's
something consistent with your purpose, it's like. Helping your
cousin pitch a tent. How much does that add,
right? OK, so you, you're in a relationship with
your cousin, it can be meaningful in that way.
And if you are in a relationship with God,
to be joining with God in a joint project
of goodness can be meaningful in that way, but
not sort of in a qualitatively different way than
being joined with other people or joined or yourself
in a project of, of, uh, good, when I
say good. That's not a good word because goodness
is just a placeholder for value, but kindness or
love or whatever it is, um, uh, it's just
not, it just doesn't add sort of a different
kind of dimension to your meaning, uh, other than,
you know, and so what, what if these same
people were doing the same things without God, they
would be just as meaningful. God just adds another
agent. Into the, into the, into the mix, um,
which again can be nice for a cooperative effort.
Now you're not just building a house by yourself,
you're doing it together with, with your friend. OK,
that's an ad, that's like, it's a nice thing
that can add a little meaning, but it's not
going to change the kind of meaning.
OK, er, but I, I mean, I, I'm an
atheist myself, uh, I mean I'm assuming, er er
if not, please correct me, but I'm assuming you
are as well. So, er, I mean, er what
if religious people were right and God in fact
existed? Do you think that would make any difference
in terms of our cosmic meaning?
Uh, NOT very much. Uh, I am in, I
hope I made this clear. When I think about
cosmic meaning, and I'm thinking about religious accounts, I
accept the premises. I accept if God exists, if,
if you're going to commune with God exactly as
you described, and I also try to imagine myself,
what kind of God could exist? How could this
work? And so even accepting the premises, all the
premises, theological, natural, supernatural, all, right? I, I, I
grant you whatever you want. And now tell me
how it works and explain to me why it's
meaningful. And when I consider the kinds of meaning
and whether it's meaningful, I don't see that it
is very significant either way, as I just described
with, let's say, our cosmic purpose.
OK, uh, so from a purely naturalistic and materialistic
perspective, uh, do you think we have Any cosmic
value that we have any relevant role in the
cosmos.
So when we think about cosmic value, we can
think about our value in the cosmos. I think
that people are very valuable. We are intrinsically valuable.
We have Uh, moral potential, intellectual potential, and we
are in the cosmos, so we have cosmic value,
but I don't think it makes, I mean, who
cares? That just tells you where your value is
located on Earth, in your house, in the wider
world. We have that kind of cosmic significance and,
uh, and cosmic value. Now, there is, so that's
based on our intrinsic value. The value that we
have in ourselves. Value can be intrinsic. Value and
significance can be intrinsic, and it is also, there's
a relative aspect. Well, how relatively significant are we
within the cosmos? Are we special? Are we the
only ones who can, you know, do the things
we do? Are we unique? And that would be
a relative significance. We don't really know because we
don't know that much about what's out there, but,
but let's say, but we should hope, I think
that we. We are not the only intellectual. I
mean, first of all, we're not the only valuable
beings on Earth. We share the planet with other,
other valuable beings, but even if we were, uh,
we should hope that there is more. We should
hope that we're not so cosmically relatively significant because
if we were, then that would mean that the
cosmos has less value in it, and that's a
high price to pay. So for example, if I
have an oak tree on my front lawn that's
beautiful and significant. Uh, IT is intrinsically significant for
its beauty and its shade or whatever, well, it's
beauty is this intrinsic significance, and it is relatively
not so significant because there's plenty of oak trees.
Should I hope that there should be that all
the other oak trees should burn down or disappear
so that I have the only oak tree? I
don't think so because that would be a decrease
in value, which is also meaningful. So in terms
of cosmic significance, I don't think we, I think
we are intrinsically significant cosmically, but I don't think
that makes much of a difference, um. Because intrinsic
significance lies in you and it doesn't matter where
you are, um, and I think we should hope
that we are relatively cosmically less significant because that
would mean that we live in a more valuable
cosmos.
But I mean if we are the only, I
mean I was going to say the only intelligent
species, that's probably not the correct way of putting
it because there are other intelligent species even on
our planet, but I mean, let me put it
this way, if we are the only human-like species
in the cosmos, does that make us more valuable?
It makes us more relatively significant. So, right, because
you're the only one, and so relatively you are
more significant in that way and more meaningful in
that way. But then you are less, you know,
but then you're in a then you're in a
cosmos living with less meaning in it because it
has less value. So, um, but that is because
their significance has both an intrinsic and a relative
aspect.
So let me ask you this, if the physicists
are correct when they predict that somewhere in the
future, I don't even know exactly how many years
in the future, but even if it is, for
example, a quadrillion years in the future, I mean
just a ridiculous amount of time in the future
at a certain point. The cosmos will no longer
be able to sustain life and basically anything, any
even small trace of what humans have ever done
will just disappear. Will that, does that make human
life or human life in terms of Thinking in
collective terms less meaningful.
So that gets to a question of and forget
the physicists, the biologists give us less time uh
before we go extinct. But um uh that depends
on the relationship between transience and meaning, right? Uh,
SO, what effect does it have on meaning that
something doesn't last forever? A rock lasts longer than
you, but it's probably less meaningful than you are.
Uh, AND so when thinking about this, I suggest
that we think about an ice cream cone, a
sand castle, and a house, right? If you're eating
an ice cream cone, if it lasted forever, that
would actually be contrary to its meaning. It would
be too cold, it would be too sweet, too
coin. It's not supposed to, so it's contrary to
its purpose. It's easy to get another ice cream
cone usually, um, and so, uh, and you don't
put that much work into it. So, and, and
uh. And so that's, that it's transience actually is
consistent with its meaning. If you build a sand
castle, you want it to last for a while.
You don't want it to last forever. You know
the tide is going to come in. Uh, uh,
THAT'S your expectation. You don't put that much work
into it. It's just a fun thing, uh, and
it's, and, um, and your, and its purpose is
for a few hours. So when you come back
the next day. You make a new sandcastle. You're
not sad to see the sandcastle gone, but if
somebody walks over while you're building the sandcastle and
kicks it over, you're upset because it didn't fulfill
its purpose. You didn't get a chance to finish
it. You didn't get a chance to admire it
for a little while. That's the sandcastle. Now let's
take a house. You put a lot of effort
into it. It's not a lot of fun. Your
expectation is that it's going to last a few
lifetimes. That's, and that's its purpose, long-term shelter. If
it burns down and, and you spend more money
than you have, which everybody does when they build
a house, and then, uh, uh, and then it
burns down 1 year later, 2 years later, 5
years later, that undercuts its meaning. It was contrary
to its purpose. You put in a lot of
effort. And you expected it to last longer. So
I think the relationship between transience and meaning turns
on the purpose, the expectation, and the amount of
effort, and that, uh, OK, so that's the relationship
between transience and meaning. Each person, uh, we don't
have a purpose. We have no ultimate meaning, so
you don't have an ultimate purpose. The things you
do in your life, uh, those things, um. Depending
on what they are, sometimes their purposes are, their
meaning is diminished when they don't last, and sometimes
their meaning that it, it aren't is not diminished
if it doesn't last. Uh, THINKING of humanity as
a collective, uh. We would have to think. It's
hard to think in those terms for me in
this way, in terms of meaning, because then you're
asking not about the meaning of a person, you're
asking about the meaning of humanity. I don't think
the meaning of humanity would, would be completely wiped
out just because it doesn't last, because transience does
not exclude meaning. It, while it lasted, it had
meaning and so it's not, uh, and what, what
is our expectation? What is our purpose? How much
effort do we put into it? Uh, AND so
maybe it would be more meaningful if it lasted,
but it doesn't mean that it is meaningless because
it doesn't last forever because we have to look
at the relationship between transience and meaning.
Right, is there such a thing as cosmic justice,
and what would cosmic justice mean
exactly? So some people talk about cosmic justice as
an example of cosmic meaning because we have In
two ways. People talk about it as making more
sense because what sense does it make that good
people should suffer and bad people shouldn't suffer, and
in terms of the value of justice. So in
terms of sense, uh, I don't think it has
anything to do with sense because Being a good
person. Has nothing to do with whether you're going
to get cancer or not. Like, what does one
have to do with the other? They're not causally
related and you only think it doesn't make sense
for a good person to get cancer if you
decided that a good person shouldn't get cancer. Well,
why shouldn't it? Cancer is just a random biological
genetic variation or, or a mutation or however it,
so, so that I don't think works at all
in terms of explanation because I don't think one
has to do with the other, um. If we're
thinking about the value of justice, can we fix
it in the afterlife? Because in this world, we
see a lot of injustice. People do things, nothing
happens to them, you know, um. Let's say you
think there's a God. He's not taking care of
you and you're being so devoted, and so maybe
the afterlife is a way to kind of fix
this. Uh, AND you can, so let's kind of
imagine it. OK, uh, I lived a good life.
I got sent to jail for some, for a
crime I didn't commit. Somebody framed me. They laugh.
They have a lot of fun about it. I
die in prison. Very unjust. OK, I get to
heaven. God's gonna fix it. The I go to
heaven. Things are good for me. Does it wipe
out my suffering on earth? No, but maybe my
suffering on earth kind of pales in comparison to
the infinite greatness in heaven. The people who, who
framed me, they're punished, and they suffer, but they
don't suffer forever because that would not be fair,
because that would be infinite suffering for a finite
crime. So eventually, they too, their suffering is relieved,
and they also have an opportunity to redeem themselves
and have heavenly, you know, and, and, and, uh,
Have sort of things be good for them in
the afterlife. And that lasts forever. So the suffering,
their punishment pales in significance. And so it comes
out sort of balanced in the end. Uh, Thad
Metz talks about this, and he says, well, maybe
we should just have like a quick, a quick
settling of accounts. Like you have a short afterlife
where you just get punished or rewarded and. And
it's over. I think that's, uh, uh, that's a
lot of metaphysical work for this kind of cure,
um, and it, uh, I don't know how satisfying
it is. So, um, but those are some of
the problems with cosmic justice. You can get a
little mileage out of it, but it doesn't seem
sort of perfect in the way that we might
think about if we really think through how it
could work.
Do you think that the fact that we suffer
and depending of course on the level of suffering
that we experience, that er that has any bearing,
On whether our lives are meaningful at all. I,
I mean if we suffer more or just the
plain fact that we suffer, does it make human
life in this particular case, since we're focusing on
humans less meaningful?
Does suffering make life more or less meaningful? I
think in order to have a meaningful life, you
have to accept that you will suffer. It's not
that the suffering itself is meaningful. It's just in
order to have a meaningful life, you got to
take risks. You have to invest. You love people.
That won't always work out. Someone might betray you.
Somebody will die. Uh, YOU put, you put effort
into your work, you'll have failures. If you don't
have failures, you're not trying hard enough. So in
order to have a meaningful life, you have to
accept. Suffering that comes along with it. It's also
comes along with the, with, with the, the effects
of time which, which imposes losses. People die, things
fall apart, and you have to accept that in
order to have a meaningful life. So it's not
that the suffering is meaningful in its own sake.
It's just in order to have meaning, you will
have to accept suffering. Now, if you don't have
a meaningful life, you'll probably also suffer. So you
might as well aim at the meaning, uh, but
you might suffer a little less if, for example,
you take the advice of some psychologist. Buddhists that
live in the moment and don't think about the
past or the future, you might have less suffering.
You will also have less meaning because meaning borrows
from the past and the future. Things are significant
to you because of their past and also because
of their future. And so, uh, that's why I
say you have to accept suffering in order to
have meaning, but it's not the suffering itself that
is meaningful. It is just a, a condition that
you have to, that comes along with a meaningful
life.
OK, but do you think that beyond a certain
point, a certain level of suffering where perhaps someone
is suffering to such a degree that they are
no longer able to properly, I mean, even perform
just normal daily tasks or something like that, that
renders their life, at least from that point onwards,
less meaningful.
It could be maybe less meaningful if a person
can no longer engage with the meaningful activities and
projects that they did before. I will not say
that their life is meaningless, because I think human,
I think life is human people, persons are intrinsically
valuable. And so they, so they'll still have a
baseline meaning. But yes, it'll, it's less life and
there are many conditions that can make life less
meaningful, and being unable to engage in meaningful projects,
efforts, pursuits, relationships will make life can of course
make life less meaningful. If somebody's life is less
meaningful. It doesn't mean it's meaningless. It could be
meaningful because they have intrinsic value for their, maybe
for their family or something like that. But of
course, it's less meaningful than if they're awake and
running around and doing things and engaging with their
life.
Right, so, uh, let me ask you then about
death, because of course earlier when I asked you,
oh, if at a certain point, as physicists predict,
uh, the universe is no longer able to sustain
life. I mean that, that's sort of, let's say,
uh, thinking about time and the, the time frame
that we're considering there, it's sort of the ultimate,
uh, sort of cosmic demise in a sense. But
when thinking about more of individual human lives, I
mean, how do you approach death? Does death itself
make lives more or less meaningful?
So in, in, in literature on death and meaning,
most people, some people argue that death makes life
more meaningful. Some people argue that it makes life
less meaningful. Many people argue that it does both,
and I think it is really time that's playing
that role and not death. So I'll just go
through it briefly. So some people think that you
need death for meaning because you need death for
the risk and the reward and motivation. If you
live forever, why would you ever? Have to do
anything, you could always do it the next day.
Could you, uh, could you really have courage for
a friend because you're not gonna, you can't risk
your life for them, uh, and I, you know,
what kind of shape will your life have if
you live forever and it doesn't end or you'll
be bored. So, I don't, I think that it
is time, and even if we live forever, we
could still have these meaning-making, uh, features in our
life because it is time that affords us that.
Time, uh, gives you. Uh, RISK, reward, and a
shape of a life. What do I mean that
time gives you that? Time gives you the opportunity
for that. So if you live forever, you would
still have plenty of risk because immortality does not
equal invulnerability. You would still be risking something if
you loved somebody. How will they treat you back?
You would still have time pressure. Uh, YOU have
to fix up your house because you're, you know,
you don't have, you don't, your water is not
working. You can take a shower the next day.
What does it matter if you're going to die
or not? You still have that time pressure. Uh,
YOU, you have to ask the girl out before
she leaves the coffee shop. You still have motivation
because you have time pressure, even if you're going
to live forever. You still have the shape of
your life. Yesterday, today, tomorrow, that gives you a
narrative arc. So it is time that provides these
background conditions for meaning that are often attributed to
death. Uh, um, THEN if we think about, uh,
the why death, so that's why I think you
don't need death for meaning, you need time for
meaning. Now, the way death is supposedly works against
meaning is because everything comes to nothing and it
annihilates you. Again, I don't think you need death
for that. If you live forever, you, it is
time that erodes meaning, uh, not all of it,
because as we talked about, transience doesn't exclude meaning,
but the ways in which some things fall apart,
you work for justice and then society reverts to
injustice. Uh, SO, uh, you, you, uh, you, you
compose or music and nobody's listening to it anymore.
Everybody forgot about it. You don't need death for
that. That happens over time. So if you live
forever. That would still happen. You would just watch
it happen, and you would see it happen over
and over again. Um, AND so you don't need,
and that's why I think that you don't need
that death doesn't make life more or less meaningful
in the way that people think about. It is
really time that does that. Now, Something that's a
little bit different about death is that it annihilates
you, which is a loss of meaning because you
have value, and, and it's also just a loss
because you care about yourself, but, uh, it's not
like it makes your life meaningless in this way
because everything that you did and cared about, whatever
continues. Has meaning in its continuation and it also
has meaning even if it doesn't continue to the
extent in which the transience has not been, uh,
has not sort of wiped away the meaning because
it doesn't wipe all meaning away. The love that
you, your mother loved you, if she dies when
you're 55 years old, she still loved you, you're
still gonna have that. Um, AND so it's not
like it came to nothing just because the person
dies, right? The Mona Lisa isn't meaningless just because
da Vinci is dead. So if you're thinking about
your own personal annihilation, we have to think again
your personal transience in terms of expectation, purpose. Um,
AND effort. You, you, you, we, you don't have
ultimate meaning, so you have no ultimate purpose. Life
is a lot of work, so maybe it's better
that you don't do it forever and you expect
to die. So I don't think in that way
your annihilation is such a threat to your meaning,
and that is why I think that it is
not death that is needed for meaning and undercuts
meaning. Instead, it is time that is needed for
meaning and that also uh erodes some of our
meaning, not all of it, but some of it.
Do you think that the fact that eventually all
of us will be forgotten, I mean, if it's
not 2 or 3 generations from now, I mean,
even if it's 1000 years from now or even
a million years from now, The fact that people
no longer remember us and whatever we did during
our lives, that makes our lives less meaningful.
Uh, I think so again, that's, that's kind of
still asking about transience and meaning. So, to the
degree to sometimes transient stuff, your life might be
more meaningful if you are remembered for longer, if
you have a, because that would mean you had
a greater impact, and impact is an aspect of
meaning. It would mean that maybe you did things
that were more significant, which is an aspect of
meaning. Uh, SO yes, long lasting longer if it's
consistent with the purpose and the effort and the
expectation, uh, you know, then, then it would, uh,
enhance the meaning of your life. But then the
fact that you don't last longer doesn't wipe out
all the meaning of your life because transience. Doesn't
wipe all meaning out. It only erodes meaning to
the extent that it is inconsistent with the purpose
that it is for it not to last, and
you know, you put in work and so in
that way it, it, uh, it erodes meaning. It
does not wipe it all out, um, and yes,
it usually in many ways depending on what we're
talking about, uh, lasting longer can be consistent with
the purpose and in that way would enhance the
meaning.
Do you think that beings that are not able
to understand the meaning in this more intellectualized or
abstract kind of way, so for example, nonhuman animals
or even perhaps humans who suffer from Some severe
form of cognitive impairment that the simple fact that
they are not able to understand meaning in the
way that we are exploring here today makes in
some way their lives less meaningful.
Less meaningful? Yes. Uh, BECAUSE again, if we're thinking
of meaning, we're thinking about, uh, engaging with, fulfilling
your human potential, engaging with, with values, knowledge, beauty,
love, truth, freedom, all of these objectively valuable things,
uh, uh, all these objective values. Can you do
things for a point? Can you act for a
reason? Do you have significance? And, and does your
Life makes sense. Does it have explanation? Uh, SO
again, on all the characteristics of meaning, uh, uh,
like I said, purpose, point, value, explanation, impact, significance,
uh, your life will be more significant if you
are able to reflect on it in that way
and engage with it in that way. Uh, YES,
that doesn't mean that you have no meaning. Uh,
um, AND I, I can't, I didn't really think
that I'm not going to say, certainly I'm not
going to say that animals have no meaning. Animals
have intelligence and they have emotions, uh, and it
varies. And I am not a zoologist or a
biologist, so I'm not speaking about, I'm not going
to pretend to have authority on that. Um, BUT
if you're thinking about these kinds of capacities, they
are capacities that, uh, Enhance and increase meaning. And
so when they are reduced, yes, I think meaning
is also reduced. That doesn't mean that if somebody
doesn't have cognitive capacity, their life is meaningless. But
as we talked about, if somebody's in a coma,
their life is less meaningful than it used to
be. If some, right, and so in that way,
yes, I'm going to bite the bullet and say
yes.
OK, so, uh, earlier we talked about religious people
and their belief in God and God's mission and
all of that. Do the narratives that we create
for our lives provide us with any, any meaning?
Should we take them seriously?
So there's a, there's a lot written on narrative
meaning, and that, uh, David Veelman writes about that,
that the story you tell your life is very
crucial to the meaning. I think that narrative value
lies in the explanation aspect of meaning. It can
make your life make more sense to you. And
in that way, I think it is part of
the explanation aspect of everyday meaning. I don't think
it has a central a role as some people
give it, right? I'm just giving it this role
and explanation. Um, AND Ito Lando, who wrote a
great book about meaning called Finding Meaning in an
Imperfect World. Yes, I'm plugging that book. Excellent book.
Um, HE, uh, he It's not in this book.
He wrote a paper about this, argues against narrative
meaning. He's like, you're mixing it up with value
because he says, let's say we have a, uh,
a drug dealer that their life has a lot
of narrative meaning. If I, you know, their, their,
their prior, you know, their, their efforts lead to
greater success over time. Everything makes sense. But, and
then you have somebody who just lives a life
that's sort of more disconnected and less, and has
less of a tight narrative or maybe their narrative
arc is off and they have more success and
happiness at the beginning and less at the end.
But whose life is more meaningful? You're still going
to go for the one that had uh more
positive value and significance and impact and all of
that. And so that's an argument against giving narrative,
uh, meaning such a cent or nar nar narrative,
such a central place in our conception of meaning.
I do think it has a place, but I
think its place is lies in explanation, and the
explanation part of everyday meaning, and it's not the
only way in which our lives have that, have
explanation, that makes sense.
Going back to the topic of time, er, do
you think that living in the presenter reduces the
agony of time's erosions?
It, yes, I think it can reduce the agony
of time's erosions. It can help you suffer less,
but it will also reduce your meaning because the
whole live in the moment, uh, if you're really
living in the moment, first of all, it's impossible.
You're living in the, in the moment, you're living
like an amnesiac. You have no, your life doesn't
make any sense at all. So it's not really
advice that we can take because that is not
how we are, we are wired to learn from
the past and plan for the future and live
in tense time. Uh, SO that's the impracticality of
it. But let's say we succeeded. That would be
terrible for meaning, because if we think about meaning,
meaning borrows from the past and the future. So
your, your, your candlesticks that you got from your
grandmother are significant to you because of the past.
Your, uh, the piano lessons you're giving to your
child are significant to you because of the moment,
but also because of the future. And so if
you're going, you fight, let's say, uh, the value
of justice. You try to right a wrong that
was in the past, you build, you aim for
a better future, and love, love is enhanced by
the history you have together, which makes things more
intimate with it, it projects into the future. You
have faithfulness over time. All of these are ways
in which you can see that every aspect of
meaning, uh, especially purpose and point, but impact, significance
and value, they are all, uh, more meaningful when
you, when you, uh, appropriately. Appreciate and learn from
the past, live in the future. I mean, you
know, do, do whatever you're supposed to be doing
in the present and project into the future that
is a much more meaningful life, even if, as
we talked about, you will then have to accept
the suffering that comes with, with time's erosions and
losses. Uh, AND so you might suffer less if
you live in the moment. It's good advice for
that. It is very terrible advice for a more
meaningful life. It will give you a less meaningful
life.
Mm. So, let me read a quote from your
book and ask you to explain it. So at
a certain point in your book, you say, quote,
a meaningful life is one lived in the fullness
of time, appropriately appreciating the past, present, and future,
accepting suffering, acknowledging our tragic losses and limitations, and
making the most of everyday meaning, end quote. So
could you explain that?
Yes, I think, uh, it kind of is consistent
with what I just said. If you want to
have a really meaningful life, you learn from the
past. It enhances, uh, the meaning in your life
because it is the way to appreciate value most
fully or to engage with value most fully, to
think about impact. The past has an impact. You
have an impact on the future. Things are significant
to you because of their past and because of
their future value, purpose, point, it all is more
meaningful when you learn from and appreciate the past,
uh, and also plan for and project into the
future. Uh, SO, uh, meaningful life is one lived
in the fullness of time. It, you will have
to accept suffering because that comes along with time.
Time includes entropy, things fall apart, relationships. Things that
you, you, you know, uh, your projects, that your
efforts, things, time erodes meaning in that way and
that makes us suffer, and we will have to
accept that people die, people get sick, so, uh,
you will have to accept the suffering that comes
along with it, uh, but that is the way
to live a meaningful life. You're gonna have to
accept the suffering that. That is part of living
a life and time, but that is also the
way to have a a meaningful life. You engage
with everyday meaning. In the fullness of time.
OK, so, uh, I mean, I, I have one
more question related to your book and then, uh,
I also want to ask you a question that
was, uh, forward to me by a patron of
the show. So, um, When it comes to a
nihilistic perspective and what the nihilists tend to say,
I mean when they say that life has no
meaning at all, I mean, what do you make
of that? Do you think that perhaps They are
conflating all of these three types of meaning and
perhaps they would be in a sense right if
they would just be talking about ultimate meaning. Do
you think that they can have a point even
when it comes to the other kinds of meaning?
What is your perspective on that?
That's really interesting, and I never thought about it
that way because I don't. I think if they're
talking about ultimate meaning they're right, but I don't
think they're talking about it because I think nihilists
deny all value. Nothing has value, and I think
that's a mistake. I'm an objectivist about value. I
think a lot of things have objective value, and
I also think that no one's really a nihilist
because everyone cares about their own suffering. That's a
value. Right, so, um. I, I just don't think
nihilism really is a, you know, when you get
down to the core, I don't think it's a
real thing. I don't think anybody can really have
that view. I think most people have some value,
care about something, even if it's just their own.
It's like, do you want to be tortured? No.
So you're not a nihilist. You care about something,
something has this value to you. Uh, AND so
I don't think that that is what the nihilists
are saying. Maybe that's kind of motivating them. And
if they got clearer on it. Uh, THEY could
stop being nihilists and just say, well, I have
everyday meaning, but I don't have ultimate meaning. So
maybe I got something to offer them.
So, I, I mean, do you think that they
are mistaken? Yes. OK, OK, so, uh, let me
ask you then, uh, the question coming from my
patron, Robert Sundstrom. He says, uh, I believe Dr.
Weinberg in another podcast has mentioned she would argue
against pet ownership. It would be interesting to hear
some. Summary of her arguments on that, although it
may not pertain to the book or topic of
this week's interview. So I mean if you could
just make a brief comment on that question,
please. Yes, so I did write a paper on
that. It's called The Opposite of an Ode to
the Human-Pet Relationship, but it is not yet published.
As you might imagine, not everybody wants to hear
about that. Uh, SO, uh, my basic arguments against
the human-pet relationship are that it is disingenuous, full
of lies, as we can see, even in this,
in the, every, all the euphemistic speech, we talk
about, uh, creating an animal when we're putting it
in a cage. You talk about, people talk about
being their, their doggy mom or their cats, you
know, your dog's mother is another dog that you
stole your dog from. And if you rescued your
dog, you rescued it from someone who stole it
from someone else. Um, AND so, uh, so many
of the, uh, we talk about spaying and neutering
instead of, you know, um, Castraating, uh, we talk
about a habitat instead of a cage. Uh, THERE'S,
there's all kinds of euphemisms that really just pervade
our conversation. It's not just one euphemism. Like we
have euphemisms about sex and, and things that are
a death which are uncomfortable or private. Here, when
we talk about the human pet relationships, it's just
pervasively euphemistic and, and all in one direction, obscuring
how, uh, how Obscuring how we, how it's more
like a pseudo benevolent subjugation. So that's one problem.
It's disingenuous and that also makes it disrespectful. And
so the second, as I also argue, so it's
disingenuous, it is disrespectful, and um Uh, pathetic for
meaning not living up to potential for humans and
animals. It's disrespectful to the animal to take over
its entire life in that way, uh, and it's
disrespectful to yourself because you are faking something and
to fool yourself is disrespectful to yourself, um, and
it is also pathetic. It's pathetic for an animal
to go from being owning. Itself and being part
of its species and the world and instead to
just being yours and belonging to somebody else, being
so dependent on you in that way, uh, on
a person, and it's pathetic for the person to
want that kind of relationship, that kind of extreme
inequality. Uh, AND even if you say, well, I
have to do everything for my dog, I have
to feed it, I have to clean up after
it. Yeah, but you still, you still control its
whole life and you don't have to do any
of it if you don't want to. Uh, YOU
could just not have a dog or, you know,
give it, give it to somebody else, which people
do all the time or. Kill it, which we
also let people do, um, and, uh, it is
also pathetic to want, and this comes up a
lot, especially with dog ownership, that dogs will love
you unconditionally, and I think that it's pathetic of
a person to go after that kind of unconditional
love. You should meet the conditions and be worthy
of love. Uh, THAT about sums it up, I
think.
OK, OK. Would you be willing to come back
on the show sometime in the future to talk
more about that?
Absolutely.
OK, awesome. And do you think that this conversation
was meaningful?
Yes, I think it was very meaningful because we
exchanged ideas, so that's a kind of respect for
each other and a respect for the audience and
sort of a kind of relationship. Hopefully this. Also,
um, uh, increases knowledge, which is good for everybody,
uh, gives me things to think about some of
your questions, gives you and the audience things to
think about. I hope it enriches people's lives, and
I hope that it has an impact and a
significance in helping people understand their lives and live
a meaningful life.
OK, so, uh, I guess I will trust the
expert here. Unless,
if we fail, that if we failed, that would
be sad and less meaningful, but I feel like
we had some success. So thank you.
OK, awesome. So let me just say that the
book is again the meaning of it all ultimate
meaning, everyday meaning, cosmic meaning, death, and time. And
of course I will be leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. And Dr.
Weinberg, thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show again. I really love
the book and I recommend it to my audience,
to everyone in my audience. So thank you so
much for doing this and for writing the book.
Thank you so much. It's a pleasure to be
here and I'm really glad to hear that you
liked the book. It means a lot to me.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegeru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Currierri, Hines, Mark Smith, John. Tom Hammel, Sardus, Fran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasila Dezara Roman Roach, Diego Londono
Correa, Yannik Punter DaRosmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlotazevski, Nele Baka Madison, Gary G. Almond, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, Joan Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Panscortez,
or Sulilisky, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith, John
Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Gelbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks
to my producers is are Webb, Jim Frank Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al
Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.